---
author: admin
title: "\n\t\t\t\tHow D infinity was discovered\t\t"
slug: '-how-d-infinity-was-discovered-'
id: 87
date: '2008-05-13 23:40:26'
layout: draft
categories:
  - interview
  - News
---

[NOTE: I will decorate the interview with proper mathematical notation and I will put in links to Wikipedia and papers where relevant. We have to worry only about the content at this point.] Dana Scott has kindly agreed to a short interview about his discovery of the domain-theoretic model of the untyped lambda calculus. He had told me the story privately when I was a student, and I found it very interesting. **Andrej:** _These days domain theory is a mature branch of mathematics which had profound influence on the theory and practice of programming languages. When did you start working on it and why?_ **Dana Scott:** I was in Amsterdam in 1968/69 with my family. I met Strachey at IFIP WG2.2 in summer of '69\. I arranged leave from Princeton to work with him in the fall of '69 in Oxford. I was trying to convince Strachey to use a type theory based on domains. **A:** _One of your famous results is the construction of a domain D_infinity which is isomorphic to its own continuous function space D_infinity --> D_infinity. How did you invent it?_ **D.S.:** D_infinity did not come until later. I remember it was a quiet Saturday in November 1969 at home (do we mention a couch?). I had proved that if domains D and E have a countable basis of finite (compact) elements, then so does the continuous function space (D --> E). In understanding how often the basis for (D --> E) was more complicated than the bases for D and E, I then thought, "Oh, no, there must exist a bad D with a basis so "dense" that the basis for (D --> D) is just as complicated -- in fact, isomorphic." But I never proved the existence of models exactly that way because I soon saw that the iteration of X |--> (X --> X) constructed a suitable basis in the limit. That was the actual D_infinity construction. **A:** _Why do you say "oh no"? It was an important discovery!_ **D.S.:** Since, I had claimed for years that the type-free lambda-calculus has no "mathematical" models (as distinguished from term models), I said to myself, "Oh, no, now I will have to eat my own words!" **A.:** _The existence of term models is guaranteed by the Church-Rosser theorem from 1936 which implies that the untyped lambda calculus is consistent?_ **D.S.:** Yes. **A.:** _Why did you feel that having only term models was inadequate?_ **D.S.:** (Your answer here.) **A.:** _D_infinity is an involved construction which gives a model for the calculus with both beta- and eta-rules. Is it easier to give a model which satisfies the beta-rule only?_ **D.S.:** Since the powerset of natural numbers P(N) (with suitable topology) is universal for countably-based T_0 spaces, and since a continuous lattice is a retract of every superspace, it follows that P(N) --> P(N) is a retract of P(N). This gives a non-eta model without any infinity-limit constructions. But continuous lattices had not yet been invented in 1969 -- that I knew of. **A.:** _Why did not anyone think of the graph model P(N) before the construction of D_infinity?_ **D.S.:** (Perhaps say something about how it was in front of everybody's eyes in recursion theory where people studied enumeration operators.) **A.:** _Where can the interested readers read more about this topic?_ **D.S.:** I would recommend these two:

*   Scott, D. A type-theoretical alternative to ISWIM, CUCH, OWHY. Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 121 (1993), pp. 411 - 440.
*   Scott, D. Some Reflections on Strachey and his Work. A Special Issue Dedicated to Christopher Strachey, edited by O. Danvy and C. Talcott. Higer-Order and Symbolic Computation, vol. 13 (2000), pp. 103-114.

**A.:** _Thank you very much!_ **D.S.:** You are welcome.